From hanselminutes.com. It's Hanselman. It's
a weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number three 31 recorded live
Wednesday, August 1st, 2012. This episode is
brought to you by Tellerik
offering the best in developer
tools and support online@telerikdotcomandbyfranklin.net training
developers to work smarter and
now offering gesture pack a
powerful gesture, recording and recognition
system before Microsoft connect for
windows developers details@gesturepak.com. In this
episode, Scott talks with Iris
class about starting programming. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman. This
is another episode of Hansel
minutes today. We've got Iris
Classon. You're calling from Sweden.
Yes, that's true from Sweden.
Yes. Hi. Hi Andy. And
you're originally Romanian, but you
spent most of your life
in Norway. You have a
very, very colorful background. Yeah,
I have. I've actually, I
was born in Romania, moved
to Norway when I was
five years old and I've
also lived in France, Denmark
and a little bit over
three years in Australia before
moving to Sweden about four
and a half years ago.
Yeah. So I've been moving
around a lot. So the,
one of the reasons I
wanted to have you on
the show was a couple
of things. First, you've got
a whole bunch of fans
on Twitter who said, you've
got to have Irish on
the show and I wasn't
familiar with you, but I
started looking around and I
realized that what's interesting about
your story and why we
thought it would be fun
to have you on the
show. Was that you have
been programming for just about
a year, is that correct?
Yes. That's true. It's official.
I've only been programming for
a year. So you started
out in a totally different
field. You're if I understand
correctly, you're an actually a
registered dietician and a personal
trainer and are more involved.
You're more of a fitness
person than, than a traditional
coder. Who's been programming since
you could talk. Yeah. Like
some people, I grew up
with a computer. I grew
up with apples and running.
Yeah, it's true. I'm a
registered dietician, a clinical dietician,
personal trainer, and also a
nutritionist. So for the most
part of my life, I've
been working within the health
and private health care and
fitness industry. So how did
you get started in computers?
I mean, we use someone
who just had email and
wasn't very technical and then
discovered coding one day. Or
how did that start? I
was one of those people
you tell to please try
turning it off and all,
and then you'll have to
come do it for me.
And it actually works. I
was studying nutrition in Australia
and that's where I met
my husband. And what happened
was I was, I was,
I wasn't really happy with
studying nutrition, but somehow when
I grew up for me,
that seemed like one of
the few options I had
as a girl, you know,
you could call him my
hairdresser, a dermatologist or, or
nurse, or you could work
within health, you know, a
lot of caretaking, you know,
options, I would say. So
I started studying nutrition because
it's, it, it felt the
right out of those options.
I was really, really unhappy
with my studies and I
struggled a lot cause I
didn't have fun. And I
kind of had a gut
feeling it wasn't what I
wanted to do, but it
just, I didn't know what
else to do. And while
we were studying in Australia,
we, one day I was
just, I was so upset
and I'd been crying of,
I've just been obsessed for
a very long time. So
we sat down me and
my husband. Then we made
the list of all the
possible jobs we could think
of like all the jobs.
I think we even made
up a few, you know,
just to fill out the
list. Once you get going,
you just, you know, you
want to add a few
more and then we wrote
down what I'm good at
and what I like doing.
And that's actually how we
came up with the idea
that maybe programming would be
something for me. And at
that point I didn't even
have a computer. So we
just pieced it together based
on what I like and
how I am as a
person, because Is your husband
a programmer that he would
have this idea? He's not
actually, he's a system specialist,
so not programmer, but he
does know his part of
it and is really good
with hardware as well. So
he knew off the options.
Now, for some, for some
people who are thinking of
getting into, into software or
engineering or computer science, it,
they have a number of
reactions. They might feel this
is boring. You know, coding
is boring and it's, it's
not an exciting career. That's
the perception that a lot
of people have. Why did,
why were you not immediately
turned off by the kind
of classic media perception that
one has of programming and
nerds and the intellectual pursuit?
Oh, because the way I
saw it, I wanted to
have a, I wanted to
have a job that wasn't
a job I want, I
just wanted to be doing
something else for eight to
10 hours a day. That
was what I wanted. So
for me, I was just
looking for something that would
make my day interesting and
something that would something that
would be fun. So I
never fought what others were
saying or what others were
thinking. Surely you must have
had some image in your
mind about what a programmer
did. Yeah. I did have
a couple of images such
as, you know, you sit
down in the basement, it's
completely dark. You have like
five computer screens. I had
that image, but at the
same time, it didn't really
scare me. Cause I guess
it's, it's a 2011 at
the time. It was 2011.
And as just, my experience
has been that often the
way we think things are,
they're never that way. No,
you wish that you grew
up in Romania initially, but
then most of your formative
years in Norway, do they
teach women differently in Norway?
Is there any kind of
a stigma between, as far
as women learning math or
science or becoming doctors or
hard engineering? I think, yeah.
I would actually say that
the inner Romania they're more
prone towards having, for example,
women learn math and engineering
compared to Norway, Norway, I
would say is very old
fashioned and probably one of
the countries are the most
old fashion. So that was
a problem. I do remember
having a math teacher telling
us that women weren't capable
of adding numbers because our
brain didn't work that way.
So I don't think he
was capable of adding friends
cause his brain didn't work
that way. So yeah, no,
I would actually say on
contrary that I didn't do
a, I didn't fare that
well with mapping school because
of that, because they would
prioritize the boys. So you
don't, you don't know whether,
or you didn't know whether
your brain worked that way
or not because they didn't
give you the chance to
try. It sounds like I
didn't do well in school,
but I would do well
otherwise. And my mom's an
engineer and also math teacher.
So I kind of knew
because she would, she would
help me on the Well
you did you, did you
get a chance to, to,
to be, to, to succeed
in school or did something
else keep you from doing
well in school? You say
I did pretty shit in
school to be honest, most
of all, because I was
a very difficult student and
the Norwegian school system, you're
not supposed to ask questions.
That's very, that's, you're just
supposed to sit there and
just listen. And I had
a hard time doing that.
So I was always asking
questions, which made me quite
unpopular with most of the
teachers. So I didn't do
too well. I actually stopped
going to school and dropped
out. And what I did,
I just packed my bags
when I was 18, 19
and I moved to Denmark
and I just studied up
for all the exams on
my own instead and got
top grades. But when I
was in school, I had
bottom grades. I did really,
really bad once I got
the control, I did well,
but in the school setting
I did, I did pretty
bad. So it's interesting that
you say that and you
know, maybe have a touch
of, of ADHD. And these
are typically personality traits, they're
stereotypes. So I understand that
every time we mention a
stereotype, someone who's listening will
email us and say, well,
that's a stereotype, but yeah,
there's stereotypes because there may
or may not be something
behind it. But people who
have attention disorders can sometimes
turn those into a strength
and really learn that they're
good at focusing on something.
So it sounds like you
may have some personality traits
that will make you a
very good programmer. What do
you think about that? I
think definitely I do have
eight adult ADHD. The, I
wasn't able to take any
medications because they were worried
they wouldn't work so well
with my body. Good need
sleep or are pretty much
I could not function on
the meds. So I've done
a lot of behavior therapy
for many, many, many years.
For me, it's actually turned
out to be an advantage.
Cause if you have a
large amount of energy and
you learn how to focus
it, which is very difficult.
But once you do, you
do have an advantage because
you have all that energy
that you can actually use
for something productive. Interesting. And
then you have a number
of obsessions and I don't
think you would mind me
using that word. You, you
are very physical, physical trainer.
And you, you mentioned to
me that you train as
much as 10 or even
14, 15 hours a week.
Yes I do. So you're
doing hardcore training and, and
one of the things that
strikes me and does it
strikes people about your blog
is that you often draw
a parallel between something that
you're doing as far as
working out and something that
you're doing in, in software?
Yeah. Well, for me, it's,
it's kind of, it's the
find some similarities between the
two mindsets, you know, the
mindset one when you are
a programmer and one you're
when you're working out it's
because it is about development,
developing yourself, developing code, developing
your body. And it's, I
think it's, it's a good
way to describe problems and
solutions. And it's interesting that
makes me wonder why more
programmers don't see that parallel.
I mean, it seems so
obvious when you say it
that, you know, good input
in gets you good input
out and programmers will put
a lot of work into
making code. Perfect. So that
when they put good things
in good things come out,
but they might do that.
Well, drinking mountain, Dew and
Fritos, you know, in the
basement. Yeah. Oh, I do
that sometimes, but it'll probably
be a diet Coke. I
think sometimes people get so
comfortable in what they're doing.
And sometimes also so scared
to, to do something else.
One thing I've really noticed,
and especially the latest week
with all the craziness on
Twitter, started to get also
negative emails and comments and
things like that. And there
is, there, there is, there
seems to me that like,
there is a lot of
people who are very scared
of things that are new
and different and it's so
easy to find that one
thing or that few things
that you are really good
at and you just grab
it and you just hold
on for dear life and
you just don't want to
step out of the box,
you know? Cause you think,
you know, I haven't been
working out every my life.
I can't go to the
gym and you know, compete
with everybody else there. But
that would be like me
thinking the same a year
ago. Look, I've never, ever
even seen code in my
life. Does that mean I'm
never going to be able
to become a programmer? I
disagree. That's one of the
things that is a little
bit tricky right now is
that more and more people
are good at programming. People
have been doing it for
a long time. There's a
lot more things to know.
So while you can't be
an expert at everything, you
can certainly specialize. So, you
know, five, 10 years ago,
there weren't any Ruby programmers.
And now there are Ruby
experts and Ruby rockstars and
things like that. Do you
find when you kind of
look at the sum total
of all the things that
you don't know, and when
you look at all of
the people in the community,
do you feel overwhelmed? Like
sometimes I feel like I'm
never going to be able
to be good at this.
Cause there's just too many
things to know. Sometimes I
get overwhelmed. One of the
first projects here at work,
I was really overwhelmed because
I was working with a
very, very good programmer. And
I just, I honestly, I
didn't understand anything. I was
completely lost. I was very
overwhelmed, but I do remember
something I was told on
my first day of school,
I was told by a
person working there and he
said, the problem is that
often with girls, cause we
were discussing why there were
so few female programmers. He
said, when a guy learns
something and he learns a
little bit, he'll go like,
Oh God, I'm the greatest
person in the world. I
know everything. But when a
girl learns something, she just
look at it and then
she look at everything else
she does know. And she'll
say, Oh no, I'm not
good enough because I don't
know all this and all
that. And that actually stuck
with me because I have
kind of sometimes been thinking
like that. I'll just focus
on everything else that is
left to learn. So what
I did, I just decided
to, you know what, I'm
going to be just as
proud of my hello world.
As whenever somebody allows me
to touch a large distributed
system, you know, I'm going
to be happy for every
little thing I learn and
hopefully I'll manage to catch
up. If not, I don't
care. Well, that's definitely the
right attitude. It makes me
wonder why more people don't
have that kind of attitude.
There's a, there's a self
esteem there that I think
that a lot of people
don't have. I did a
blog post a while back
about being a phony. You're
familiar with that term. Yeah.
And, and a lot of
people feel like that. And
people were surprised when I
did that blog post that
I felt like a phony
sometimes that, you know, sometimes
you just don't know something
or you, you know, you
go on vacation for a
month and some new thing
or new pattern or new
library comes out. And then
you're like, Oh man, I'm
just barely hanging on. But,
but I can do hello
world. And that's more than
some people can do and
I can do, you know,
fizz buzz or whatever, the
new interview question that people
are doing right now. And
it sounds like you have
a healthy attitude. Oh, thank
you. I have to say,
I just said there's been
a lot of good support
in the community, but now
for the people listening, I
just easy on the pressure,
you know? Cause everybody's so
keen on giving advice, that
advice turns into rules. A
good programmer does that. Good
programmer does this. And you
just get more and more
and more and more rules
to follow. And that is
that's when I get overwhelmed
with all the rules, it's
a lot to know to
take in. Yeah. Yeah. I
think that, I think they
like that though. You said
advice turns into rules. I
think that the programmers remember
that programmers as a job,
our job is to make
declarative statements and we make
them in code and they
compile and they work. So
it's unfortunate that we'll take
those declarative statements that we
make. And then we'll just
turn them into actual declarative
statements we'll make in life
like, you know, thou shall
do this thou shalt do
that. So we'll be talking
to other people like we
are programming them and Private,
a private club with a
certain set of rules and
also expected behavior. Like, look,
I've, I've read a couple
of the books, clean coder
and all those pragmatic programmer
and they're really good books.
But if you want to
read something, that's going to
give you really bad self
esteem. Those books might help
a little bit. Cause unfortunately
they're supposed, I think they're
supposed to give a lot
of good advice, but as,
especially as a newbie or
just a person just starting
out with programming, when you
read those, you kind of
feel like you have to
do it now and that's
everybody's doing it. And if
you don't, you're not good
enough. I kind of learned
that there are there it's
advice and I think it's
an ideal world and it's
great if you get there,
but you don't suck. You
don't. Well, what do you
think that the community needs
to do differently to make
things more friendly for, for
newbies? I mean not every
newbie has been programming a
year has got a job
and you've accomplished that nor
have they been on Twitter
and been, been loud on
Twitter. And there may, there
may be a thousand newbies
that are listening to this
that feel overwhelmed and like
they're, they don't have anything
to say, but you put
a blog up and you
actually have a series in
your blog that I find
really interesting where you're actually
asking stupid questions and you
actually came out and called
them stupid questions. What do
you tell the community about,
about how to make things
more friendly to, to newbies,
especially ones who aren't as
forward as you are? Well,
I would say they have
to show more acceptance because
it is, they have to
show more acceptance. Cause they're
also, there is also the
stigma that you have to
act and be like a
nurse to be accepted in
the community. And I own,
honestly, I'll say now I
have no idea. If I'm
a nerd, I like fashion
like makeup and I like
high heels and I like
working out. I like cooking
and traveling and I'm not
sure if I would call
myself a nerd and I
don't think that should matter.
There's a lot of, there's
a lot of this oldest
rules making it really hard
for new programmers. If they
feel like it don't fit
in what I went to
school, one of the person
in my class, he was
a chef. We had a
chemist and we have people
who have been working with
completely different things. And I
reckon still they're quite good
programmers today on they'll get
even better, but it's so
important to feel like you
belong. And one, all these
rules exist, the power you
have to behave and have
you, how you have to
act and talk and all
that. If you feel like
you don't fit in, then
you kind of, you know,
you remove yourself from that
community with time and that's
actually, that's a big loss
for the community. Yeah, I
think you're right. I wonder
how many people we've lost
through negativity or lack of
openness. And I also worry
about, about women or people
who aren't just your average,
you know, middle aged man.
There are a lot of
women out there who don't
use their pictures as their
avatars. They use a name.
That's not their real name
because it's such a, it's
such a negative community towards
anyone who's different. Yes it
is. And I actually, I
was thinking about that latest
yesterday. I have no idea
what to do. Should I,
should I just focus on
my programming skills or can
I allow my personality and
me as a person to
be included? Because I think
how I am a program
or a big part of
it is how I am
as a person. That is
my selling point. Not just
the code. I don't want
to be reduced just to
code, but it seems like
I won't get the respect
of the community unless I
do jail staff. Is that
true? It depends on who
you're hanging out with. You
know, there are, there are
clubs and there are groups
that like things to be
a certain way. But I
like to think of the
community as being a meritocracy.
You know, I mean they
say, talk is cheap. Show
me the code. You know,
if you might, you might
start, let's be honest. You
might start out as an
oddity. People might say, Hey,
she's, she's dyed her hair
bright red. And she's a,
she's a woman and she
works out. So here's three
things that make you different
than the typical, hopefully being
a woman will be the
least of those things. That's
strange, you know, and people
will, they might fo follow
you. And I don't necessarily
mean follow you on Twitter,
but follow you in your
career initially. Cause like, Oh,
here's an interesting woman. And
then you'll immediately hopefully raise
the discourse to an intellectual
one. And people will forget
that, Oh, by the way,
Iris is a woman, but
what have you read her
blog? And the woman thing
I would hope would fall
away. There's always the a
there's the old internet joke
that on the internet, no
one knows that you're a
dog. You know, you, you
might be like an actual
canine, but as long as
you can code and your
pull request compiles, it doesn't
really matter. So if one
chooses to flaunt, isn't the
right word. But to, to
emphasize some aspect about them,
then they will, you know,
they are controlling their personal
brand. Like I could have
hidden the fact that I'm
diabetic. I know people who
have hidden that for various
personal reasons, but it's who
I, as a part of
who I am. And if
I had done that, maybe
people would have treated me
different in some jobs, but
I wouldn't have gotten involved
in healthcare coding and medical
device, you know, organizations and
things like that. If you
hit your fitness, a penchant,
then you might not get
an offer at some point
in the future to work
on fitness software. Or if
you decided to, instead of
being Iris with a Iris
avatar, you could have just
become a Simpsons character and
never said a word about
your, your location or your
nationality or your interests. Well,
I want to have a
face. I don't want to
be a celebrity, but I
want to have a face.
And because I believe like
a lot of especially young
women who want to learn
programming want to become a
programmer, what, who are they
supposed to turn to? Where
can they find somebody to?
Where can they find the
friends you? So I want
to have a face. Cause
I reckon I'm strong enough
to take, you know, take
the crap that might come
with having a face with
my COVID has a face
for the cold should. I'm
hoping will be a top
notch quality, but I want
to, I think that's great.
I think that I have
a feeling that that will
be the line out of
this podcast that people will
remember because I think you're
right. The code should stand
on its own. But when
someone digs behind it to
find out that person they'll
find a person with diverse
interests and a diverse personality
and that isn't simply, Oh,
a woman wrote this or
Oh, someone with red hair
wrote this or whatever. Look
somebody with green short hair.
Yes, no judging. And why
was it? I was at
Oz con. I was at
Oz con the opensource conference
recently. And I think there
were more people with purple
and blue hair than there
were people with real hair.
So I think that there's
nothing, nothing against people who
color their hair purple or
whatever. No, because, because it's
cool. Look, it was cool
when I was 40 and,
and I reckon it's really
cool. Now, Why do you,
did you go and get
a software engineering degree or
is this all still still
self-taught? Well, we have, we
have different types of schools
in, in Sweden. This type
is actually more of a
practical training. It's a two
year school and I went
the first year. I won't
do the second year. I'll
just do the exams, but
I won't tend to attend
the lectures as I've already
gone through the material that
we'll be doing the next
year. It's been a, it's
been a very good school,
then I've enjoyed it very
much. And I've learned as
much as I could from
there. And, but a lot
I had to do on
my own. So you still
have to do your own
studies next to school, everybody.
I think everybody knows Your
previous education was in nutrition
and specifically clinical nutrition. I'm
sure that you went to
school for that, but then
also did studying on the
side. What do you think
about the balance that one
needs to find between a
formal education and an ongoing
education that you, you learn
on your own at home?
I think the most important
is you have to have
that real passion. The moment
you think I should, or
someone you feel, you feel
like you have to do
it and you remove the,
I want to do it.
That's when you're going to
struggle. And the hard part
about studying on your own
is you have to have
discipline because nobody's going to
expect anything from you. It's
just you, the books or
the tools you choose to
use, but it's just, you,
you have to make yourself
proud. Nobody's gonna, you know,
clap their hands once you're
done with it. So you
won't get the grad, you
won't get anything you might
even miss out or some
sleep. You just have to
find the pride in what
you are doing for yourself.
Drive come from though. I
think a lot of people
after a few years in
the business get pretty tired
and I I've talked to
a number of programmers that
are burned out and you've
only been doing this a
year. I've been doing this
almost 20. And I admit
to being very tired sometimes.
And I wouldn't mind going
and becoming a clinical nutrition
person and a fitness person
and you can have my
job. You know what I
mean? Like how do you
know you're going to be
this excited in a year
or 10 years? I don't
know because I've spent most
of my life being very
unhappy, being very miserable and
just hating everything with my
life and myself. Didn't actually
didn't even want to live.
I just, I was in
a very, very dark place
for very, very many years.
And once I saw the
light at the end of
the tunnel and I managed
to pull through, I just
realize how many years I've
lost. And I just feel
like how a lot of
catching up to do. And
I've wasted too much time
on that. So it's, it's
time to be happy, passionate,
and enjoy life and all
the possibilities I get. Now
I wasted so many years
and I can't afford to
do that again. Cause you
never know how life's going
to turn out. You know
what the end will be,
but you don't know how
long it's going to take
until you get there. My
dad always, I don't know.
I don't know if your
dad is the same way,
but fathers always have these
three or four things that
they say constantly like these,
say these saying for the,
for the last 40 years,
my dad has always said,
whenever we talk about life,
he says, you know, none
of us are getting out
of this alive. Oh, it's
true. It's true. Everybody's dying.
Just some of us said,
don't have a diagnosis. You
know, we're all dying some
way or the other. Well,
that's a depressing thought really,
but we want to end
on that. What to do
as a community, to get
women and children more involved
in computers. I've had a
couple of people on the
show. We've talked to some
organizations like black girls code
that are focused on not
only women, but women of
color. What, what, what do
we need to do to
get young women to not
think that this is, you
know, a bad job? I
think it's a pretty cool
job. We need to catch
them when they're 12 years
old, not when they're maybe
not when they're 30. Well,
I say it's the best
job in the world. We
have to be more supportive
and less judgemental. I think
those two things are very,
very, very important. There is
a certain form of elitism
in all this people who've
worked really hard to get
where they are, might sometimes
forgets that they also were
updates zero once. So let's
never, ever, ever forget that
we all have written or
hello world and secretly, it
was really, really happy about
it. So let's not forget
that it used to be
a big thing when we
started out at well, for
me, it still is. Cause
I'm just starting out, but
we must not forget that
and understand that they need,
they need their cheerleaders and
we're supposed to be. That's
great. I appreciate that. Well,
thank you so much for
talking to me today. Yeah,
no thank you for calling
me. I hope I gave
you some good answers. No,
there's a lot of really
great, interesting information here and
quotable quotes, and we'll make
sure to put links to
your Twitter as well as
your blog, but people can
find you at IRS. clawson.com
two S's I R I
S C L a S
S O n.com and also
on Twitter. And this has
been another episode of Hansel
minutes. We'll see you again
next week.